# MDANSE 

## Molecular Dynamics Analysis for Neutron Scattering Experiments

MDANSE is a Python application designed for computing neutron observables from molecular dynamics (MD) trajectories. The results can 
be directly compared with neutron scattering experiments, particularly inelastic and quasi-elastic neutron scattering 
spectroscopies.

To do this, MDANSE reads trajectories created with MD simulation software
such as CASTEP, VASP, Gromacs, DL_POLY, CHARMM, LAMMPS, PBD, DFTB etc.,
and provides both a graphical user interface (GUI) and a command line interface. 

This MDANSE project has been published previously in: \
[G. Goret, B. Aoun, E. Pellegrini, "MDANSE: An Interactive Analysis Environment for Molecular Dynamics Simulations",
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2017, 57, 1, 1–5](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00571).

## Version information

This is the 2.x branch of MDANSE, which consists of two Python packages, MDANSE (the analysis code) and MDANSE_GUI (the graphical user interface). The final version in the 1.5.x series can still be found in the **legacy** branch, but is not being actively developed.

The current version of MDANSE is currently still at the _beta_ stage. You can help it advance to the official release stage by reporting problems you experience while using MDANSE.

## Quick start: installation

We recommend that you install MDANSE in a Python virtual environment. You can create a virtual environment named mdanse_env by typing
```
python3 -m venv mdanse_env
```

To activate your virtual environment, type
```
source mdanse_env/bin/activate
```
in a bash console, or
```
mdanse_end\Scripts\activate.bat
```
if you are using cmd.exe on Windows.

While your virtual environment is active, you can install MDANSE:
```
pip install MDANSE MDANSE_GUI
```
and start the graphical interface by typing
```
mdanse_gui
```

## Installation: development version

At the moment MDANSE and MDANSE_GUI are undergoing frequent changes. If you would
like to try out the latest development version, you can install directly from GitHub
using pip:
```
python3 -m pip install "git+https://github.com/ISISNeutronMuon/MDANSE@protos#egg=MDANSE&subdirectory=MDANSE"
python3 -m pip install "git+https://github.com/ISISNeutronMuon/MDANSE@protos#egg=MDANSE_GUI&subdirectory=MDANSE_GUI"
```

## Quick start: the workflow

The typical workflow of MDANSE:

1. Convert a trajectory from the file format generated by an MD simulation software into the MDANSE trajectory format (MDT),
2. Load the converted trajectory into MDANSE,
3. Perform an analysis,
4. Check the results with the plotter.


The most complete user documentation of MDANSE can be found on [our Read the Docs page](https://mdanse.readthedocs.io/en/protos).
At the same time, it is still possible to access the original **[MDANSE User Guide](https://epubs.stfc.ac.uk/work/51935555)**.

Other information including example scripts can be found on the [MDANSE website](https://www.isis.stfc.ac.uk/Pages/MDANSEproject.aspx) 
while the most recent tutorials are stored in the [MDANSE-Examples repository](https://github.com/ISISNeutronMuon/MDANSE-Examples).

## What can MDANSE do?

Firstly, MDANSE can read the output of MD simulation software. It does this by providing converters for different file formats
into an MDT file (HDF format), which is then used for all calculations. The following MD packages are supported:

- CASTEP
- CHARMM
- DFTB
- DL_POLY
- Forcite
- Gromacs
- LAMMPS
- NAMD
- PDB
- VASP
- XPLOR
- ASE
- MDAnalysis
- MDTraj

The converted trajectory can then be loaded into MDANSE, where it can be visualised and animated.
Then, various properties can be calculated from the positions and velocities of atoms.
The results can be compared with neutron (or, for some analysis types, with X-ray or IR)
experimental data, or used as a prediction of results of a potential experiment.

The following properties can be computed:

<details><summary>Dynamics</summary><ul>
<li>Density of States</li>
<li>Mean Square Displacement</li>
<li>Position Autocorrelation Function</li>
<li>Position Power Spectrum</li>
<li>Reorientational Time Correlation Function</li>
<li>Root Mean Square Deviation</li>
<li>Root Mean Square Fluctuation</li>
<li>van Hove function (self)</li>
<li>van Hove function (distinct)</li>
<li>Velocity Autocorrelation Function</li>
</ul></details>

<details><summary>Infrared</summary><ul>
<li>Dipole Autocorrelation Function</li>
<li>Infrared</li>
</ul></details>

<details><summary>Scattering</summary><ul>
<li>Current Correlation Function</li>
<li>Dynamic Coherent Structure Factor</li>
<li>Dynamic Incoherent Structure Factor</li>
<li>Elastic Incoherent Structure Factor</li>
<li>Gaussian Dynamic Incoherent Structure Factor</li>
<li>Neutron Dynamic Total Structure Factor</li>
<li>Scattering Length Density Profile</li>
<li>Static Structure Factor</li>
<li>Structure Factor from Scattering Function</li>
<li>X-Ray Static Structure Factor</li>
</ul></details>

<details><summary>Structure</summary><ul>
<li>Area Per Molecule</li>
<li>Average Structure</li>
<li>Coordination Number</li>
<li>Eccentricity</li>
<li>Molecular Trace</li>
<li>Pair Distribution Function</li>
<li>Radius of Gyration</li>
<li>Solvent Accessible Surface</li>
<li>Voronoi (volume per atom)</li>
</ul></details>

<details><summary>Thermodynamics</summary><ul>
<li>Density</li>
<li>Temperature</li>
</ul></details>

<details><summary>Trajectory</summary><ul>
<li>Center of Masses Trajectory</li>
<li>Trajectory Filter</li>
</ul></details>

Each of these analyses can be controlled using a number of parameters. For example,
the user can select a subset of trajectory frames or a subset of atoms
on which to perform the calculation, or specified atoms can be substituted with
different elements/isotopes. Finally, their results can be saved in an MDA file (HDF5 format)
and plotted directly in MDANSE, 
or saved a set of DAT files (text format) to be processed by the user using
their own software of choice.

More detailed information on how MDANSE works, what it can do, and the science can
be found on [our Read the Docs page](https://mdanse.readthedocs.io/en/protos).

## Citing MDANSE

If you used MDANSE in your research, please cite the following paper:

>[G. Goret, B. Aoun, E. Pellegrini, "MDANSE: An Interactive Analysis Environment for Molecular Dynamics Simulations",
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2017, 57, 1, 1–5](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00571)

## License

MDANSE is licensed under GPL-3.0. See [LICENSE](https://github.com/ISISNeutronMuon/MDANSE/blob/develop/LICENSE) for more 
information.


## Acknowledgements

MDANSE started as a fork of [version 3 of the nMOLDYN program](https://github.com/khinsen/nMOLDYN3).
nMOLDYN was originally developed by Gerald Kneller in 1995 and subsequently also by Konrad Hinsen, Tomasz Rog,
Krzysztof Murzyn, Sławomir Stachura, and Eric Pellegrini. MDANSE includes most of the code of nMOLDYN3, and also code
from the libraries [MMTK](https://github.com/khinsen/MMTK) and [ScientificPython](https://github.com/khinsen/ScientificPython).

For more information see:

>[K. Hinsen, E. Pellegrini, S. Stachura, G. R. Kneller, "nMoldyn 3: Using task farming for a parallel spectroscopy-oriented analysis of molecular dynamics simulations",
J. Comput. Chem. 2012, 33, 2043–2048](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.23035)

We are grateful to all the people who have helped in some way or another to improve nMOLDYN and/or MDANSE along those years. 
Apart from the main developers mentioned above, we would like to acknowledge explicitly the contributions done in the past 
by Bachir Aoun, Vania Calandrini, Paolo Calligari, Gael Goret, Remi Perenon and Rastislav Turanyi.

The MDANSE project is supported by Ada Lovelace Centre, ISIS Neutron and Muon Source, Science
and Technology Facilities Council, UKRI, and the Institut Laue-Langevin (Grenoble, France). 
Past financial support from the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) through contracts 
No. ANR-2010-COSI-001-01 and ANR-06-CIS6-012-01, and the Horizon 2020 Framework Programme of 
the European Union under project number 654000 is also acknowledged.

## Joining the project

MDANSE is currently maintained and developed by software developers from ISIS and ILL, but we are fully open to new
collaborators who would like to contribute code, documentation, tutorials or usage examples.
If you want to join the project contact:

>Dr. Sanghamitra Mukhopadhyay (sanghamitra.mukhopadhyay@stfc.ac.uk) \
ISIS Neutron and Muon Source \
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory \
Didcot, UK

## Software Inquiries

You are welcome to use the issue tracker to submit ideas for
extending the MDANSE code or to report problems you encountered.
However, if you prefer to contact the MDANSE developers directly,
you can send us a message:
>MDANSE Help (MDANSE-help@stfc.ac.uk)
