# MDANSE_GUI 

## MDANSE_GUI Python Module

This is the module containing the Graphical User Interface (GUI) of the
Molecular Dynamics Analysis for Neutron Scattering Experiments (MDANSE) software package.

The GUI depends on the [MDANSE package](https://pypi.org/project/MDANSE).

## Version information

This is the first release of MDANSE_GUI 2.0.0.

> [!NOTE]
> Considering the large number of different MD engines and analysis types,
> it is still possible that some conversion or analysis runs will not
> produce the expected results. Please report any problems
> you experience while using MDANSE by adding them to the
> [GitHub issue tracker](https://github.com/ISISNeutronMuon/MDANSE/issues).
> You can also send a message to MDANSE-help@stfc.ac.uk to get in touch
> with MDANSE developers.

## Quick start: installation

We recommend that you install MDANSE in a Python virtual environment.
You can create a virtual environment named mdanse_env by typing
```
python3 -m venv mdanse_env
```

To activate your virtual environment, type
```
source mdanse_env/bin/activate
```
in a bash console, or
```
mdanse_env\Scripts\activate.bat
```
if you are using cmd.exe on Windows.

While your virtual environment is active, you can install MDANSE:
```
pip install MDANSE_GUI
```
and start the GUI by typing
```
mdanse_gui
```

If you are using a virtual environment in which you had installed
MDANSE in the past, you can upgrade MDANSE to the current version
by typing:
```
pip install --upgrade MDANSE
```

If you experience problems with the installation, you may want to upgrade pip
```
pip install --upgrade pip
```
and try again.

Please remember to activate your virtual environment when you start a new
shell before you run `mdanse_gui`.

## Quick start: workflow

The typical workflow of MDANSE:

1. Convert a trajectory from the file format generated by an MD simulation
   software into the MDANSE trajectory format,
2. Load the converted trajectory into MDANSE,
3. Perform an analysis,
4. Check the results with the plotter.

Each one of these operations has its own dedicated tab in the GUI.
The plotter consists of two tabs, one for selecting the data for plotting,
and the other for viewing and customising the plot.

The most complete user documentation of MDANSE can be found on
[our Read the Docs page](https://mdanse.readthedocs.io).

Other information, including tutorials, can be found in the
[MDANSE-Examples repository](https://github.com/ISISNeutronMuon/MDANSE-Examples).

## Citing MDANSE

If you used MDANSE in your research, please cite it according to the CITATION.cff file
in the [MDANSE GitHub repository](https://github.com/ISISNeutronMuon/MDANSE).
On GitHub, you can use the "cite this repository" link to generate the citation.

## License

MDANSE_GUI is licensed under GPL-3.0. See
[LICENSE](https://github.com/ISISNeutronMuon/MDANSE/blob/protos/LICENSE)
for more information.

## Acknowledgements

The VTK-based 3D viewer was taken and adapted from another software project
authored by Eric Pellegrini. We would like to thank Eric for making
his code available.

## Joining the project

MDANSE_GUI is currently maintained and developed by software developers
from ISIS and ILL, but we are fully open to new collaborators who would
like to contribute code, documentation, tutorials or usage examples.
If you want to join the project contact:

>Dr. Sanghamitra Mukhopadhyay (sanghamitra.mukhopadhyay@stfc.ac.uk) \
ISIS Neutron and Muon Source \
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory \
Didcot, UK

## Software Inquiries

You are welcome to use the
[issue tracker](https://github.com/ISISNeutronMuon/MDANSE/issues)
to submit ideas for
extending the MDANSE code or to report problems you encountered.
However, if you prefer to contact the MDANSE developers directly,
you can send us a message:
>MDANSE Help (MDANSE-help@stfc.ac.uk)
